Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Accepted Manuscript
This is an Accepted Manuscript, which has been through the Royal Society of Chemistry peer
review process and has been accepted for publication.
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Accepted Manuscripts are published online shortly after acceptance, before technical editing,
formatting and proof reading Using this free service, authors can make their results available
to the community, in citable form, before we publish the edited article. We will replace this
Accepted Manuscript with the edited and formatted Advance Article as soon as it is available.
You can find more information about Accepted Manuscripts in the Information for Authors.
Please note that technical editing may introduce minor changes to the text and/or graphics,
which may alter content. The journal's standard Terms & Conditions and the Ethical
guidelines still apply. In no event shall the Royal Society of Chemistry be held responsible for
any errors or omissions in this Accepted Manuscript or any consequences arising from the
use of any information it contains.
ROYAL SOCIETY OF CHEMISTRY
www.rsc.org/cerp

---

1 2 ROYAL SOCIETY 3 OF CHEMISTRY Chemistry Education Research and Practice 6 7 8
PERSPECTIVE 9 10 Reconsidering learning difficulties and misconceptions in 13 chemistry:
Emergence in chemistry and its implications for 14 chemical education 1 5 Received 00th
January 20xx, Accepted 00th Ji 20) eee 16 Halil Tumay 17 DOI: 10.1039/x0xx00000x 18
Identifying students’ misconceptions and learning difficulties, and finding effective ways of
addressing them has been one 19 of the major concerns in chemistry education. However,
the chemistry education community has paid little attention to 20 determining
discipline-specific aspects of chemistry that can lead to learning difficulties and
misconceptions. In this article, 21 it is argued that emergence plays a critical role in the
epistemology and the ontology of chemistry and hence it should be 22 taken into account for
understanding learning difficulties and finding ways of addressing them in chemistry. It is
particularly 23 argued that one of the fundamental source of learning difficulties and chemical
misconceptions is learners’ failure to 24 understand the emergent nature of chemical entities,
their properties, and interactions. In the article, an interpretive 25 analysis framework is
suggested for identifying specific learning demands and the sources of learners’
misconceptions about 26 ‘the emergent chemical properties and phenomena. Findings from
previous research on learners’ misconceptions regarding 27 emergent chemical properties
are reanalyzed and interpreted through this framework. Inadequacies of typical teaching 28
practices and their consequences are discussed from an emergentist perspective. Finally,
implications of the emergentist 29 perspective for more meaningful chemical education are
discussed. 30 31 1983; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Gilbert and Boulter, 1998: 32 Introduction
Nersessian, 1999, 2002, 2009; Greca and Moreira, 2000). 33 rn Moreover, many scholars
emphasized that conceptualization Model-based accounts of conceptualization in science and
ae learning science have been increasingly emphasized by many earning, and reasoning of
scientists and ordinary people are scholars from diverse fields such as philosophy of science,
Similar in many respects (e.g., Carey, 1985; Brewer et al., 1998; 36 P ee Bi dS: 1991;
Nersessian, 2009 37 cognitive science, and science education. According to these and
Samarapungavan, Nersessian, ). accounts, models occupy a pivotal role in science and
school According to these accounts, both scientists and students use 38 PY a pi an science,
and our conceptual learning is dominated by building, basic cognitive processes to make
sense of experiences. 39 testing and revising models (Gentner and Stevens, 1983;
Nersessian (2009, pp. 137-138) clearly emphasized this point: a Johnson-Laird, 1983: Giere,
1988, 1991; Gilbert and Boulter, practices of scientists are extensions of the kinds of tices
humans employ in coping with their environment and 1998; Nersessian, 1999, 2002, 2009;
Greca and Moreira, 2000, P*#° 42 : , 1999, 2002, : 2000, : 432002; Halloun, 2004) These
accounts provided us with a useful problem solving of a more ordinary kind. ... Basic cognitive
44 and productive perspective for understanding how we Stategies are extended and refined
in explicit and critically 45 conceptualize our experiences, how we construct, validate, and
Teflective attempts to devise methods for understanding nature. 46 represent our knowledge
of the world in science, school science, AS With mundane modes of inquiry, the success of
those created 47 and ordinary situations. by science is rooted in human nature and the nature
of the world.” 48 From a distributed and situated cognition perspective, there From the

---

modeling perspective we continuously create, test, 49 are significant differences between the
knowledge production 24 tevise models that represent significant aspects of our world 50 and
validation processes in science and the learning and i Ofder to make sense of our
experiences. Models can be 51 reasoning processes in school science especially with respect
to from many different perspectives, however in the 52 social-institutional norms, resources,
and interactions in these COMtext of science education Gilbert and Boulter (1998) offered 53
(Brewer and Samarapungavan, 1991; Brewer et Yety useful classification of models based on
their contextual 54 1998: Nersessian, 2009). Despite such differences, the core of #4
functional characteristics. They classified models as mental 55 conceptualization in science,
school science and other ordinary ™0dels, expressed models, consensus models, and
teaching 56 situations is based on modelling processes (Gentner and Stevens, ™Odels. A
mental model is a personal and cognitive 57 representation of the target system being
modelled. It is formed 58 by an individual, either on their own or within a group. An 59 [Gazi
University, Department of Science and Mathematics Education = Chemistry expressed model
is an external representation of the target 60 Education, Ankara, Turkey. E-mail:
tumay@gazi.edu.tr generated from mental models and expressed through any mode See
DOI: 10.1039/x0xx00000x of representation, such as action, speech, or writing. A consensus
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00,
1-15 | 1
Please do not adjust margins

---

Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
model is an expressed model that has been tested by scientists and which has been socially
agreed by at least some of them as having some explanatory merit. A teaching model is a
specially constructed model used by teachers to aid learners’ understanding of a consensus
model (Gilbert and Boulter, 1998). Based-on Gilbert and Boulter’s (1998) classification of
models we can say that, one of the main aims of science education is supporting learners in
constructing more accurate and adequate mental models of scientific models through
teaching models. From this perspective, determining the challenges and learning difficulties in
constructing mental models of scientific models and then developing effective teaching
interventions to overcome the determined difficulties is critically important.
Although ideas from educational psychology and constructivism provides us with a general
theoretical framework for understanding the effects of previous knowledge on learning new
knowledge, we need more productive domain-specific theoretical frameworks to understand,
explain, domain-specific learning difficulties, misconceptions and corresponding teaching
interventions in the chemistry context. Therefore, we should focus on nature of chemistry and
chemical knowledge to clarify the possible sources of misconceptions and learning difficulties
that stem from unique characteristics of our discipline. Determining learning difficulties in a
discipline and finding ways of addressing them meaningfully requires a sound understanding
of the discipline and nature of disciplinary knowledge (Shulman, 1987; Scerri, 2001; Erduran
and Scerri, 2002; Erduran, 2007; Tiimay, 2016). As emphasized by Scerri (2001),
understanding nature of chemistry and chemical knowledge is of great importance for
chemical educators: “Chemical educators will gain a great deal from familiarizing themselves
with such research since it will enable them to be clearer in the way in which they present
various aspects of chemistry to their students and colleagues. It is not enough to train
chemistry teachers about just the contents of chemistry courses and perhaps a little
educational psychology. Chemical educators need to be introduced to the study of the nature
of chemistry.” Based on modeling perspective and arguments on the necessity of
understanding the nature of discipline, we can say that, in the scientific models —> teaching
models —> learners’ mental models chain; in order to understand the sources of learners’
faulty mental models and misconceptions we should firstly focus on what is modeled in
chemistry, how it is modeled, and how it is represented. To date, the most fruitful contribution
in this respect has been Johnstone’s notions regarding the role of macroscopic, microscopic,
and symbolic (MMS) levels of thought or representations in chemistry (Johnstone, 1991,
2000). In this framework, the macroscopic level includes observable substances, processes
or phenomena; the microscopic level includes unobservable entities such as atoms,
molecules and ions that are conceptualized to explain macroscopic observations; and the
symbolic level includes symbols, formulas, and equations that represent macroscopic or
microscopic entities and processes. In fact, Johnstone’s macroscopic, microscopic, and
symbolic levels framework has been the most impressive discipline- specific paradigm in

---

chemistry education research (Gilbert and Treagust, 2009; Talanquer, 2011; Taber, 2013).
Many studies based on the MMS levels framework significantly improved our awareness
about the critical role of understanding the particulate nature of matter and multiple
representations in chemistry education. These studies have led to many fruitful pedagogies
for supporting meaningful understanding of chemistry (e.g., Gabel, 1993; Kozma and Russell,
1997; Kozma et al., 1997; Tasker and Dalton, 2006; Gilbert and Treagust, 2009), and
indicated the necessity and fruitfulness of such discipline-specific perspectives for clarifying
learning difficulties and developing meaningful teaching approaches. In this article, based on
ideas from the philosophy of chemistry, it is argued that the emergence is one of the most
Research on learning difficulties and misconceptions in chemistry
Students’ misconceptions and learning difficulties in understanding scientific models has been
one of the major concerns in chemistry education research (Teo et al., 2014). Studies on
students’ conceptions have revealed that many students at all levels of education have
misconceptions about basic chemical concepts, even after years of instruction (e.g., Nakhleh,
1992; Garnett er al., 1995; Taber, 2002). However, many of these studies have only revealed
lists of students’ common misconceptions without sufficiently clarifying their underlying
sources (Taber, 2000; Talanquer, 2006). Such an inventory or catalogue approach was
criticized by many chemistry educators who strongly emphasized that developing effective
instructional approaches to overcome misconceptions requires identifying and taking into
account of the underlying sources of these misconceptions, rather than merely listing them
(Gilbert and Watts, 1983; Taber, 2000; Talanquer, 2006; Tiimay, 2014, 2016). Whereas the
chemistry education community has devoted substantial attention to identifying and
documenting students” misconceptions, it has paid little attention to determining
domain-specific aspects of chemistry that can lead to learning difficulties and misconceptions.
In many studies on students’ conceptions, authors frequently referred to generic factors drawn
from educational psychology especially from constructivism) such as learners’ prior
knowledge, everyday experiences, confusion of scientific and everyday terminology, and
incorrect representations in textbooks as the possible sources of misconceptions in chemistry
(e.g., Schmidt, 1991; Wandersee et al., 1994; Sanger and Greenbowe, 1999; Schmidt et al.,
2003; Demircioglu et al., 2005). Although it is well established that these generic factors
obviously affect learners’ conceptualizations, and should be taken into account in teaching;
they alone do not give us a clear mechanism for understanding why specific misconceptions
emerge and not other possible alternatives. Consequently, these generic factors have usually
been ambiguous propositions in understanding specific learning difficulties and consequently
unproductive in developing effective teaching interventions for meaningful learning and
conceptual change.
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Please do not adjust margi

---

ry Educatio
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
critical aspects of chemistry that affects the epistemology and the ontology of chemistry (Luisi,
2002; Scerri, 2004, 2007; Lombardi and Labarca, 2005; McIntyre, 2007; Newman, 2013), and
hence it should be taken into account for understanding many learning difficulties and
misconceptions in chemistry education. In the following sections, I tried to clarify this
argument and its implications for chemistry education through examples from basic topics of
chemistry.
Newman, 2013). An emergent property is a novel property of a whole, which is neither
possessed by its constituent parts nor can be predicted from them. Emergent properties differ
from non-emergent or additive properties which can be deduced from properties of the
components (Luisi, 2002; Talanquer, 2008). Physical properties such as mass or charge are
examples of additive properties. For example, the mass of a molecule is equal to the sum of
the masses of its constituent atoms. In contrast to an additive property, an emergent property
of a whole cannot be deduced from the presence or properties of the constituent entities. As
emphasized by Scerri (2004, 2007), electronic configurations for atoms and molecules,
empirical order in which the atomic orbitals are filled, and the periodic table cannot be
predicted or deduced fully from the knowledge of lower level entities using quantum
mechanical calculations. The mostly known example of emergence is the formation of water
from the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen. The properties of water such as its ability to make
hydrogen bonds, its high surface tension, its chemical reactivity etc. are emergent properties.
Just like any other molecule, the properties of water are not present in its constituent atoms
(hydrogen and oxygen atoms), but emerge from the configuration and interactions of oxygen
and hydrogen atoms in this particular molecular structure (Luisi, 2002). Another example of an
emergent property is the aromaticity of the benzene molecule, which is not present in the
constituting atoms, but arising as a result of their structural relations and interactions (Luisi,
2002). As can be seen from the given examples, particular structural configurations and
resulting constrained interactions among the constituent entities can lead to emergence of
new properties of the whole. Therefore, chemists treat each chemical entity as an organized
system with a particular structure and interpret its emergent properties by considering a
network of relations in the system (Reiher, 2003; Villani, 2014). In other words, chemists
unavoidably view chemical entities such as atoms and molecules as systemic entities rather
than mere aggregates of constituent entities in order to make sense of emergent chemical
properties. Such a perspective has led chemists to organize and examine chemical entities at
different levels of complexity. According to Jensen (1998), all chemical entities and their
properties from the most fundamental entities to more complex structures can be considered
at three levels: electrical, molecular, and molar. However, when we consider practicing
chemists’ ways of reasoning and conventional teaching practices in chemistry, the chemical

---

entities can be considered at four levels in terms of emergence relation (Tiimay, 2016):
electrical, atomic, molecular, and molar (see Table 1). From a chemical perspective, the
electrical level includes the most basic constituents of chemical entities which are electrons,
protons and neutrons. The atomic level includes isolated single atoms and ions. The
molecular level includes molecules and compounds that consist of atoms or ions. The molar
level includes aggregates of atomic or molecular level entities. When we consider these levels
in terms of emergence relation; entities and their properties at each higher-level emerge from
the relations and interactions of lower-level entities.
Emergence in chemistry
The real world is very complicated and each scientific discipline focuses on different aspects
of the world, The practitioners of a discipline attempt to understand and control the world from
their disciplinary perspective by constructing models of how the concerned systems work. A
model can never capture reality in all aspects, but a good model can capture the major
features of the target system, thereby allowing realistic predictions about the system. The
practitioners’ reasoning approaches in the modeling process and the conceptualized entities,
their properties and relations/interactions in the constructed models shaped by the disciplinary
perspectives and the nature of examined phenomena. So, understanding the key concepts,
theories, laws, and models in a discipline requires a meta-understanding of discipline-specific
perspectives. Only by acquiring such a meta- understanding, one can meaningfully
understand the ontology of the discipline, epistemological approaches of practitioners and
consequently nature of resulting knowledge in the discipline. Chemistry is essentially
concerned with the composition, properties, reactions and changes of substances that make
up our world. One of the most widely recognized characteristics of chemistry is that chemists
try to explain the macroscopic world by means of microscopic entities (Johnstone, 1991,
2000; Jensen, 1998). Our experiences at the macroscopic level include solutions, their colors,
precipitations, formation of gases, change in electrical conductance etc. These observations
are explained by hypothesized theoretical entities (such as atoms, molecules and ions), their
properties and interactions at the microscopic level. These chemical entities, their properties
and interactions are unobservable and this poses serious learning difficulties for students
(Johnstone, 1991, 2000; Gilbert and Treagust, 2009). As Kozma and Russell (1997, p. 949)
point out, “understanding chemistry relies on making sense of the invisible and the
untouchable.” In many studies this abstract nature of chemistry has been emphasized as one
of the most important sources of learners’ misconceptions and frequently it was proposed that
macroscopic, microscopic and symbolic representations should be used in coordination to
overcome this difficulty (Gilbert and Treagust, 2009). Another important, but currently
neglected aspect of chemistry is the emergent characteristic of chemical entities, their
properties and interactions. In the current debates on nature of chemistry and chemical
knowledge it is widely acknowledged that chemical entities such as atoms and molecules
have many emergent properties that cannot be deduced or predicted from the knowledge of
their components (Luisi, 2002; Scerri, 2004, 2007;

---

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 3
Please do not adjust margi

---

Chemistry Education Research and Practice
PERSPECTIVE
Table 1 The chemical levels of entities based on emergence relation and examples of
emergent properties at each level.
Level Entities
Examples of emergent properties
Molar HClig), NaClag, Hei)
Aggregates of atomic or molecular level entities (¢.g.,
Tendency to expand in all directions for gas samples Surface tension Viscosity Phases and
phase transition
Molecular entities (e.g., Ho, HCl, NaCl)
Molecules and compounds consisting of atomic level
Molecular structure and isomerism Acidity/basicity, acid strength Molecular polarity
Aromaticity Chemical Gonic/covalent polarity) Magnetic properties
bond = and character,
properties strength and
Atomic entities (e.g., H, He, Na, Na*, Cl, Ch)
Isolated atoms and ions consisting of electrical level
Electron configuration Chemical reactivity Oxidation states Atomic line spectra Metallic
character Magnetic properties
Electrical (©), proton (p* ), and neutron (n° )
The most basic entities in the chemical ontology: electron
As has been pointed, in chemistry, emergence is generally associated with the appearance of
novel properties with increasing structural complexity from sub-atomic particles to atom,
molecule, and molecular complexes (Luisi, 2002). Chemists have long been aware of the fact
that, the structural configuration of the constituents forming a chemical entity plays acrucial
role in determining the properties of the entity. Relating properties of chemical entities to their
structures has been one of the major chemical heuristics in predicting and interpreting
properties of chemical entities. We can exemplify the role of structure-property relation in
chemical explanations with the isomerism or with explaining the reactivity/stability of atoms or

---

molecules with their electron configurations. For instance, we can consider a typical example
of isomerism by comparing and contrasting ethyl alcohol (a colorless liquid alcohol) and ether
(a colorless gaseous ether). Both ethyl alcohol and ether have the molecular formula C2H6O;
they consist of same kind and number of atoms, however they differ in both physical and
chemical properties. These differences results from different structural configurations of
constituent atoms as seen in Figure 1. Different arrangement of atoms in the molecular
structure changes constraints and relational interactions among the constituent atoms, and in
turn, properties of the molecules as a whole.
Fe
il I | H-—¢c—e—0-H eee lod HoH H H
Ethyl alcohol, Dimethyl ether, C2HeO Figure 1 Structural arrangement of constituent atoms in
ethyl alcohol and dimethyl ether.
Structural configuration of constituents constraints their interactional relations and these
constrained relations can give rise to emergence of unforeseen properties. From that
perspective, chemical properties of an atom emerge from interactions of constituting
electrons, protons and neutrons in the atomic structure. For example, existence of electrons in
quantized energy levels, electronic configurations and unique line spectra of atoms can be
regarded as emergent properties that arise from interactions of constituent parts in specific
structural
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 4
Please do not adjust margins

---

ry Education R
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
configurations of atoms. Similarly, chemical properties of a molecule emerge from interactions
of constituting atoms in the molecular structure. For example, acidic character of a molecule
and the strength of acidity cannot be deduced or predicted from the constituent atoms; these
properties emerge from constrained interactions of constituent atoms in the molecular
structure (Tiimay, 2016). The properties of chemical compounds are not the sum of the
properties of their constituent atoms and we cannot predict the properties of chemical
compounds from a knowledge of the properties of their constituent atoms in isolation or in
other compounds. Clearly, chemical entities such as atoms and molecules are more than just
simple aggregates of constituents. Therefore chemical entities should be regarded as
systems that have emergent properties as a result of specific structural configurations and
constrained interactions of constituent entities. In contrast to emergence at the atomic and
molecular level, emergence at the molar level derives not from structurally constrained
interactions of constituents but from relatively dynamic and random interactions among the
atomic or molecular level entities in their aggregates (Chi er al., 2012). Emergent molar
properties can be considered as the macroscopic properties that are observed in aggregates
and they derive from collective interactions of entities in dynamic, random motion rather than
relatively stable interactions that are constrained in an organized structure. For example,
macroscopic gas samples have a tendency to expand in all directions. Whereas individual gas
particles do not have such a property, it emerges at the molar level as a result of random
collisions between gas particles (Rappoport and Ashkenazi, 2008).
determine exact rules for chemical properties that are valid in all cases. For instance, we
cannot formulate a precise formula that give us exact conclusions for acid strength of a
substance such as “acid strength = ki A + k2 B— C” (ki and kz are constants, A, B, and C are
measurable properties of entities). In many cases, all we can do is inferring qualitative factors
(such as relative bond polarity and bond strength) that can explain the emergence in question
when bring together in a systemic manner. Since changes in constituents, their structural
configurations and resulting relational interactions in the system might give rise to novel
factors that have not been considered before, there are always exceptions to general rules in
chemistry. As a result, chemists regard pre-established factors and principles more as
heuristics rather than exact rules that are valid in all cases (Taber, 2009; Tiimay, 2016). For
example, when considering bond polarity between the same atom pairs, such as C and H, we
tend to focus on pre-established electronegativity values of these atoms, and to assume that
electronegativity values are constant. However, electronegativity of an atom is affected by
various factors such as oxidation state and hybridization. When the hybridization of C atom
change in a different molecule system; it will be an in situ factor that should be taken into
consideration. As another example, we can consider the “aufbau principle” that is used to

---

predict the electron configurations of elements. Despite its usually correct predictions,
“chromium and copper, for example, do not agree with the predictions. Detailed studies show
that the configurations of chromium and copper result from complex electron interactions that
are not taken into account in the simple model. However, this does not mean that we should
discard the simple model that is so useful for most atoms. Instead, we must apply it with
caution and not expect it to be correct in every case.” (Zumdahl and Zumdahl, 2012, p. 119).
Chemists interpret all chemical knowledge with such a cautionary approach, and we almost
inevitably attach caution adverbs (such as “usually”, “frequently”, “generally”) to our
generalizations and principles. Consider for example the generalization “metals and
nonmetals form ionic compounds”. We can show numerous examples that agree with this
generalization. However, as usual in chemistry, there are also exceptions. For instance,
SnClz and SnCls are typical metal- nonmetal compounds. Although SnCl2 is an ionic
compound, SnCli is a covalent compound because of strong polarization effects of Sn**.
Consequently, it is more correct to state this generalization as “metals and nonmetals usually
form ionic compounds”. “Usually”, “generally”, and similar qualifiers warn us about the
heuristical nature of given generalizations or principles, and inevitable use of such qualifiers is
natural consequence of emergent characteristic of chemical properties. When reasoning
about an emergent chemical property, chemists should determine and consider all relevant
factors (both pre- established ones and the ones that arose in situ) and their effects in the
system simultaneously to reach a conclusion that is more consistent with the empirical
findings. The issue of emergence makes chemistry very difficult but also fascinating science.
When chemists face with unforeseen emergent properties that need explanation, conjecturing
previously unknown parameters that lead to the emergence is the
Effects of emergence on chemical epistemology and practicing chemists’ ways of reasoning
In each discipline, the nature of entities, their properties, relations and interactions not only
affect the ontology of the discipline, but also epistemological reasoning approaches of
practitioners and modeling process in that discipline. The emergent nature of chemical
entities, their properties, and interactions considerably influences and shapes chemists’ ways
of reasoning about chemical systems, and subsequently the nature of chemical explanations
(Tiimay, 2016). As has been discussed, chemical entities are complex systems that have
emergent properties, and even though we classify different substances as acids, bases, alkali
metals etc. based on their similarities in some respect, we know that similarity is not identity or
equality. Any change in constituent entities and/or their structural configurations in a system
changes constraints and relational interactions among the constituents; and in some cases,
completely unexpected results (new emergencies) can appear. Because of this unavoidable
nature of chemical systems, chemistry is an inductive science more than a deductive science.
In turn, chemistry typically lacks precise mathematical formalisms that are found in deductive
sciences (such as F = k qi q2 / r? in physics). Due to the issue of emergence, we cannot
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016

---

Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 5
Please do not adjust margins

---

Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Learning demands of understanding emergent properties in chemistry
most difficult task they face. In these cases, pre-established explanatory chemical factors
serve as heuristics for chemists. When the pre-established chemical factors are insufficient to
make an adequate explanation, chemists reanalyze the system by considering constituent
entities, their properties, possible relations and interactions to infer newly emerged factors
that will fill the gap in explanation. Such a process of inferring emerged features or factors in
the considered system can be called as backward inference (from empirical results to
explanatory factors) or retrospective reasoning. We can trace the development of an
emergentist perspective in many topics such as chemical bonding, hybridization of atomic
orbitals in chemical bonding, the empirical order in which the atomic orbitals are filled, Ligand
Field Theory etc. In all of these and similar cases in which an emergentist perspective has
been adopted to explain the property in question; proposed conceptualizations about the
properties, relations and interactions of constituent entities in organized chemical structures
were not derived from known properties of constituent entities, rather they were inferred to
explain observed empirical findings (Scerri, 2004, 2007). This imply that, in many cases, our
knowledge about chemical properties of substances were not resulted from deductive
inferences from known entities and properties, but from retrospective inferences of an
emergence mechanism that explains observed findings. In determining the properties of a
chemical compound there is no theoretical shortcut or exact rules that is valid in all cases,
therefore we must empirically study the sample and then infer emergence factors and
emergence mechanism through a retrospective analysis when needed. As Caldin (1959)
clearly specified in his examination of the role of hypothetico-deductive methods in chemistry,
experiments in chemistry are not typically used to test and falsify a hypothesis, model or
theory, but are used to make it more precise. As stated by Caldin, although some
observations are made to test chemical theories, making observations in order to test
hypotheses is neither the central activity, nor the main purpose of chemical research. Caldin
illustrated this situation by the study fields in physico-chemistry (The determination of the
structures of molecules, thermodynamic investigations on physical or chemical equilibria, and
kinetic investigations on the rates of physical or chemical change). He emphasized that in
each of these fields chemists begin their investigations with a molecular model of some kind,
and they do not test this molecular model, rather they seek to make it more precise. According
to him this characteristic of chemical research stems from the fact that, in contrast to physics
where theories are general in scope, and mathematically exact, so that precise deductions
could be made from them; “many of our theoretical hypotheses are by contrast restricted in
scope, contain undetermined parameters, require additional hypotheses in application, and do
not give numerically exact predictions.” (p. 221). Apparently, this unique characteristic of
chemical research and practicing chemists’ ways of reasoning stems from the emergent
nature of chemical entities, properties, and interactions.

---

Without considering the nature of chemistry and clarifying discipline-specific constraints; all of
our attempts, whether aimed at understanding learning difficulties or developing effective
instructional approaches, will be unrealistic and less meaningful. As has been discussed,
emergence plays a crucial role in the epistemology and the ontology of chemistry, and
consequently meaningful understanding of chemistry requires adopting an emergentist
perspective. Understanding, predicting, and explaining an emergent property requires taking
into account of all constituent entities, their structural relations and interactions simultaneously
in a holistic and systemic manner. However, developing such an emergentist perspective is
not easy and places specific learning demands on learners of chemistry. These learning
demands involves at least following understandings:
- Conceptualizing chemical entities as structured systems that have emergent properties. -
Becoming aware of that isolated chemical entities and their properties are modified in some
way when they become part of a system because of constrained relational interactions in the
system. - Realizing — that constituent entities can lead to emergence of unforeseen new
properties in the system. - Recognizing that every change in constituent entities and their
structural relations affect properties of the system. Therefore, even very similar chemical
entities have differences, no matter how similar they are. - Understanding that the emergent
properties of a system cannot be attributed to any constituent entity or a single parameter. All
constituent entities, their structural relations and interactions in the system should be taken
into account in an integrated manner. - Becoming aware of that principles and generalizations
are heuristic principles rather than exact, determining rules.
relations/interactions — of
chemical
If students fail to develop such an emergentist perspective, they will inevitably have many
misconceptions in chemistry. In that case, students’ chemical misconceptions about an
emergent property may not derive from a failure to understand isolated entities, their
properties and interactions or the parameters of emergence in isolation, but from a failure to
think all constituent entities, their structural relations and interactions in a holistic and systemic
manner. Consequently, one of the fundamental source of the learning difficulties and chemical
misconceptions is failure to understand the emergent nature of chemical entities, their
properties, and interactions. Learners’ chemical misconceptions that derive from a failure to
understand the emergence in chemistry may appear in the following forms.
6 | Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Please do not adjust margins

---

Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
- Attributing an emergent property of a system to particular components. - Viewing an
emergent property of a system as sum of the properties of constituent entities. - Viewing
chemical heuristics as exact determining rules. - Focusing on salient factors or cause-effect
relations in isolation instead of systemic consideration of all relevant ones.
the related species without such an electronic configuration (Taber, 2009). - 1,
I-dichloroethane dissolves in water, and is immiscible with pentane. Because it is a highly
polar molecule and “like dissolves like” (Ashkenazi and Weaver, 2007).
Focusing on salient factors or cause-effect relations in isolation instead of systemic
consideration of all relevant ones. - HF is a stronger acid than HCl, HBr, and HI because acid
strength increases as the H-X bond polarity increases (Tiimay, 2016). - Vapor pressure of a
liquid increases as the total number of vapor particles increases (Tiimay, 2014). - Exothermic
reactions are spontaneous spontaneity of a reaction depends on the enthalpy change
(Sézbilir, 2002). - Polarity of molecules depends only on the electronegativity difference
between the constituent atoms. CIF3 is a polar molecule because fluorine atoms are highly
electronegative (Furié and Calatayud, 1996; Wang and Barrow, 2013). - Ionization energy
depends only on the distance of the electron from the nucleus. Sodium has a higher first
ionization energy than aluminum because the 3p electron of aluminum is further away from
the nucleus compared to the 3s electron of sodium (Tan et al., 2005). - Hydrogen has the
smallest atomic radius because atomic size depends only on the number of electrons in the
system (Talanquer, 2006; Salame et al., 2011).
These items can be used as an interpretive analysis framework for understanding learning
difficulties and identifying the sources of learners’ misconceptions about emergent chemical
properties and phenomena. Many chemical misconceptions regarding emergent chemical
properties that are documented in previous studies can be analyzed and interpreted through
this framework. Such an analysis can give clear insights into the sources of examined
misconceptions and likely to be effective teaching interventions for conceptual change. Some
of the well-known chemical misconceptions were reinterpreted from this perspective in the
following section.
because the
Attributing an emergent property of a system to particular components. - CHa and NaH are
acids because the substances that contain H are acids (Demircioglu et al., 2005). -
CH3CH2-OH is a base because the substances that contain OH are bases (Demircioglu et
al., 2005). - Acid strength increases as the number of H in the acid molecule increases
(Demircioglu et al., 2005). - is a gaseous compound because it consists of fluorine, which is a
gaseous element (Levy Nahum er al., 2004). - Copper is red-brown and malleable because

---

the copper atoms are red-brown and malleable (Ben-Zvi et al., 1986). - Gases expand when
heated, because gas particles expand when heated (Griffiths and Preston, 1992; Lin et al.,
2000).
As can be seen from these examples, suggested emergentist framework can be more
informative and meaningful for identifying specific difficulty areas in learning emergent
chemical properties and phenomena. It can also reasonably be argued that, this perspective
will be more beneficial to chemistry educators in developing effective pedagogies and learning
materials to overcome the identified difficulties and misconceptions since it reveals the
underlying sources of them rather than proposing ambiguous generic factors as causes of
misconceptions.
Viewing an emergent property of a system as sum of the
properties of constituent entities.
- Salts are neutral because they contain neither H nor OH (Demircioglu er al., 2005). - A
neutralization reaction produces a neutral solution (Schmidt, 1991; Demircioglu er al., 2005). -
Color of a reaction product is weighted sum of the colors of reactants. If a yellow and a blue
reactant reacts, the color of the reaction product will be green (Talanquer, 2008). - CH4 does
not conduct electricity because it consists of the two elements: and Ci, both of which do not
conduct electricity (Levy Nahum et al., 2004).
Research on learners’ understanding of emergent properties in chemistry
Despite its critical importance in chemistry and chemical understanding, the issue of
emergence and its relation to learning difficulties and misconceptions have been largely
overlooked in chemical education research. Many studies on learners’ conceptions in
chemistry have examined learners’ understanding of the relationship between the
macroscopic world and the microscopic world of chemical entities (e.g., Ben-Zvi et al., 1986;
Andersson, 1990; Gabel, 1998), Although these studies were actually focused on students’
understanding of the particulate nature of matter and the relations between the macroscopic,
microscopic, and symbolic representations; their results were informative in gaining insights
into students” understanding of emergence relations between the macroscopic
Viewing chemical heuristics as exact determining rules. - BeCh is an ionic compound,
because metals and nonmetals always form ionic compounds (Luxford and Bretz, 2013;
Enawaty and Sartika, 2015). - C# and even Cl! ions are more stable than their corresponding
neutral atoms. Because, chemical species with an octet structure, or a full outer shell, are
more stable than
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 7

---

Please do not adjust margi

---

Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
and the microscopic world. Results of these studies clearly showed that learners have
difficulty in understanding the emergent properties of macroscopic aggregates and many
students attributed a wide range of the macroscopic properties and changes shown by bulk
matter to the microscopic entities (atoms, molecules, etc.) (Ben-Zvi et al., 1986; Griffiths and
Preston, 1992; Nakhleh, 1992). For example, many high school students and prospective
elementary teachers believed that particles of a matter expand or get larger as the matter
changes from liquid to gaseous state or when heated (Griffiths and Preston, 1992; Valanides,
2000); 10th grade students proposed that copper atoms are malleable and have
reddish-brown color (Ben-Zvi et al., 1986); and some students suggested that soft substances
are made up of soft particles (Andersson, 1990). Students’ tendency to attribute the
macroscopic properties of matter (such as hardness, coldness, color, and physical state) to its
microscopic level particles seems to be an intuitive way of making sense of observable
macroscopic properties and changes. From the learners’ perspective, such explanations
might be meaningful and at first sight explain the macroscopic world in terms of learned
microscopic entities such as atoms, molecules, and ions. However, these intuitive
conceptions contradict with scientific ideas that explain the emergence of macroscopic
properties in terms of arrangement, motion, and interaction of constituent microscopic entities.
A few recent study that examine explicitly whether students understand the macroscopic
properties as emergent properties have confirmed this conclusion (Rappoport and Ashkenazi,
2008; Talanquer, 2008). Rappoport and Ashkenazi (2008) examined how graduate and
undergraduate chemistry students and faculty members connected macro, submicro, and
symbolic representations. Participants were asked to solve conceptual problems and a
think-aloud interview protocol was used to reveal their ideas. Rappoport and Ashkenazi used
a ‘levels of complexity’ framework to analyze responses. In this framework, they considered
the macro and symbolic modes as system-level representations, and the submicro mode as
component-level representation. Results of the study indicated that faculty members thought
of system-level properties as emerging from mechanistic interactions between particles on the
component level. However, it was found that, students generally adopted a ‘submergent’
perspective and either failed to connect the system and component levels, or thought of
system-level properties as determining the behavior of particles on the component level. The
findings of these studies have demonstrated that many chemistry learners fail to understand
the emergence of macroscopic properties of matter and consequently develop various
misconceptions about the relation between the macroscopic and the microscopic world.
Unfortunately, learners” conceptualizations of emergence of chemical properties at the atomic
and molecular level, related learning difficulties and misconceptions have not been sufficiently
investigated up to now. Only recently a few research studies focused on this topic (Talanquer,
2008; Tiimay, 2016). For example, Talanquer (2008) investigated college chemistry students’
ideas about the expected properties (color, smell, and taste) of the products of chemical
reactions represented at the molecular level. Using multiple-

---

choice questions and individual interviews, Talanquer explored the extent to which novice
learners intuitively used an additive framework to predict the properties of the product, rather
than an approach that recognizes the emergent nature of the properties of chemical
compounds. Results of the study indicated that most students relied on an additive heuristic to
predict the properties of chemical compounds, overlooking the possibility of emergent
properties resulting from the interaction of the atoms that compose the system. In his review
on chemistry students” implicit. assumptions and heuristics, Talanquer (2013) emphasized
that attribution of the macroscopic properties to the microscopic entities, as well as viewing
properties of chemical compounds as the weighted sum of properties of constituent atoms,
indicates that students tend to use additive thinking rather than emergentist thinking. Many
students who used additive thinking seemed to implicitly assume that atoms have fixed
properties and the properties of a compound result from sum of the properties attributed to the
constituent particles (Talanquer, 2013). In a more recent study, Tiimay (2016) investigated
undergraduate chemistry students’ conceptions of acids, and acid strength and examined
whether or not they conceptualized acid strength as an emergent chemical property. Results
of the study showed that many learners failed to conceptualize acid strength as an emergent
property that arises from interactions of multiple factors. Rather than considering all relevant
factors in a holistic and systemic manner, the majority of students focused on a limited
number of factors (especially bond polarity) when making predictions and constructing
explanations about acid strength. The findings indicated that, many misconceptions about
acid strength stemmed from learners’ failure to conceptualize acid strength as an emergent
property, and consequently their failure to recognize and consider all factors that affect acid
strength. These relatively few research on learners’ conceptualizations of emergent chemical
properties revealed the critical importance of emergence as a disciplinary lens for
understanding many learning difficulties and misconceptions in chemistry education.
Implications for chemical education
Identifying students’ misconceptions and learning difficulties, and finding effective ways of
addressing them has been one of the major concerns in chemistry education research. As has
been emphasized by many scholars from diverse fields including chemical education,
philosophy of chemistry, and cognitive psychology; determining learning difficulties in a
discipline and finding ways of addressing them meaningfully requires a sound understanding
of the discipline and nature of disciplinary knowledge (Shulman, 1987; Scerri, 2001; Erduran
and Scerri, 2002; Erduran, 2007; Tiimay, 2016). In this article, it is proposed that emergence
plays a critical role in the epistemology and the ontology of chemistry (Luisi, 2002; Scerri,
2004, 2007; Lombardi and Labarca, 2005; McIntyre, 2007; Newman, 2013) and hence it
should be taken into account for understanding learning difficulties and ways of addressing
them in chemistry. It is particularly argued that one of the fundamental source of
8 | Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016

---

Please do not adjust margi

---

Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
learning difficulties and chemical misconceptions is learners’ failure to understand the
emergent nature of chemical entities, their properties, and interactions. As has been pointed,
conceptualizing chemical entities, their properties and interactions from an emergentist
perspective and interpreting examined chemical phenomena accordingly places specific
learning demands on learners of chemistry. In order to understand emergent properties,
learners should view chemical entities as structured systems and take into account of all
constituents, their constrained relations and interactions in a holistic and systemic manner.
However, this is not an easy task and learners might focus only on the perceived salient
factors while ignoring other relevant ones. In such cases, learners’ misconceptions about an
emergent property may not derive from their lack of knowledge or misunderstanding of the
constituent entities, their properties or emergence related factors and their effects in isolation,
but may derive from the failure of conceptualizing the emergence of the property in a systemic
manner by considering all relevant factors holistically. As will be discussed in the following
sections, this argument has epistemologically sound and critical implications for more
meaningful chemical education.
phenomena. Knowledge of the atomic world is knowledge of models developed by humans,
and communicated within our culture through talk, books and so forth.” Unfortunately, it
seems that our typical teaching models, instructional resources and practices in chemistry
education are inadequate for supporting learners in developing an emergentist perspective
through comprehension of emergent characteristic of chemical entities, their properties,
relations, and interactions. In lack of an emergentist perspective, students can easily interpret
teaching models and explanations intuitively based-on perceived salient features. In such
cases, they unavoidably construct flawed mental models and develop misconceptions in
predictable forms. In order to exemplify how typical teaching models and practices can lead to
misconceptions in lack of an emergentist perspective; we can consider functional group
approach in organic chemistry, explanations of changes in acid strength in periods and
groups, and the octet rule.
Functional group approach
Understanding and explaining an emergent property of a chemical system is not an easy task
especially when the complexity of the system is increased. For each system, we do not start
from the most basic level entities. For example, when considering properties and interactions
of H2O we do not start from electrons, protons, neutrons and then proceed to the atoms and
then H20 as a whole. Instead, for reducing complexity to a manageable degree, we tend to
consider proximal lower-level entities as basic units. For the H2O example, in order to explain
the properties, relations, and interactions of HzO we consider H and O atoms, their structural
relations, and interactions in the H2O molecule. If such a treatment is not sufficient for
explanation of the concerned emergent properties, we proceed to the next lower-level entities.

---

Another strategy adopted by chemists to reduce complexity is to determine subsystems that
are commonly encountered and of which structural/relational interactions of components and
resulting consequences well established. Functional group approach in organic chemistry
reflects this strategy. We can consider R-COOH as an example. Carboxyl group (-COOH) can
be considered as a subsystem. Although changes in alkyl group (R-) affect imposed
constraints to a degree; resonance, bond polarities, and bond strengths in the -COOH
subsystem are relatively stable and well established properties. The functional group
approach is commonly used in organic chemistry as an explanatory and predictive framework.
In this approach, chemical properties of organic compounds are attributed to the presence of
functional groups. Nothing wrong with this approach and we all use it in the context of organic
chemistry. However, we use this way of thinking with caution because we are aware of the
emergent nature of chemical properties. We know that chemical properties of compounds that
have the same functional groups are similar but not identical. They are not identical because
chemical properties are also modified by other factors, such as the position of the functional
group, or branching in the carbon chain. However, novice students might interpret given
examples and
Inadequacies of typical teaching models and practices in lack of an emergentist perspective
We want our students to construct mental models that are closer to chemical models, and
through these models understand, explain, and predict the chemical world. This aim can be
accomplished only by learners’ adoption of chemists’ perspectives and ways of thinking about
the concerned entities, their relations, properties, and interactions. This, in turn, necessitates
students to adopt an emergentist perspective to understand and use chemical models
meaningfully. Learners’ mental models are essentially qualitative conceptualizations of
entities, their properties, relations and possible interactions in a system (Johnson-Laird, 1983;
Greca and Moreira, 2002). They construct their mental models from available experiences
and information sources. These experiences can be either first-hand empirical experiences or
indirect experiences that obtained through conveyed representations of real or hypothetical
systems. In chemistry, conceptualized explanatory entities, their properties, relations, and
interactions are typically at the atomic or molecular level. They are unobservable and learners
have no chance of gaining direct experience with them that can be used as a base for
abstracting mental models or testing and refining them (Johnstone, 1991, 2000; Kozma and
Russell, 1997; Coll and Treagust, 2003; Laszlo, 2013). In most cases, the only experience
base that is available to students regarding chemists’ models of the underlying entities, their
properties, and relations is expressed teaching models. Therefore, learners acquire new
information in chemistry primarily by instruction or by reading (Taber, 2001; Nakiboglu, 2003).
This point has been clearly emphasized by Taber (2008, p.1041); “students” ideas about the
nature and properties of atomic level particles are not abstractions from their own direct
experiences of the
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016

---

Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 9
Please do not adjust margins

---

Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
explanations reductively and they can infer that chemical properties of compounds can be
determined only by the presence of particular atoms or atom groups. But, this is not the case
in reality and students should be warned to consider all constituents, their relations and
interactions in the molecule to reach more valid inferences. For example, all of the following
compounds include -O-H group but their chemical properties are not determined only by the
-O-H group.
‘The explanations for these trends generally involved H-A bond polarity and bond strength
(Moran, 2006). In these explanations, it is proposed in some cases that the more polar the
bond, the stronger the acid; while in other cases bond strength is emphasized and increasing
acid strength is attributed to decreasing H-A bond energy. In some textbooks bond strength
and bond polarity are mentioned together misleadingly: the electronegative groups withdraws
electron density from the H— A bond, thereby weaken it (Moran, 2006). In fact, abstracting
the underlying factors that affect chemical properties from periodic trends is commonly used
and in most cases almost inevitable approach in chemistry. As has been discussed, chemical
entities are complex systems and any change in constituent entities and/or their structural
relations correspondingly change the system as a whole and its chemical properties, Because
of the emergent characteristic of chemical entities, their properties, and interactions we
cannot formulate precise rules regarding chemical properties; instead we attempt to identify
qualitative parameters that are capable of explaining emergence in such a way that simulation
of their integrated effects can give rise to the observed properties. In the teaching practice, we
try to get students to understand the parameters of emergence and then use them in the
relevant systems to predict and explain emergence. When there are multiple parameters, the
most straightforward way to show the effects of each parameter would be to fix all parameters
other than the concerned one and changing the parameter in question and then observing its
effects just like as we do in controlled experiments. However, controlling and manipulating all
variables is not possible in chemistry. Because, as has been discussed, any change in a
parameter means the change of a system as a whole and this also makes fixing other
parameters impossible. For example, in examining the effects of bond polarity and bond
strength on acid strength we cannot control all variables and manipulate only chosen ones
when making comparisons. In such cases, we tend to compare chemical systems that have
variability regarding the concerned parameter and are similar in terms of other variables as
much as possible. One of our common heuristics to meet this requirement for binary
compounds is making comparisons across periodic groups and periods. Even though we are
aware of that we cannot infer simple/direct causal relations from such comparisons as if they
were controlled experiments, and the inferred relations should be used heuristically with
caution in a systemist-emergentist perspective; it might not be so obvious for learners.
Unfortunately, in typical teaching practices, only a single dominant factor is emphasized for
each trend in these comparisons, without adequately clarifying other relevant factors in a

---

holistic manner. Such teaching practices seemingly do not promote understanding the
chemical property in question as emerging from the integrated effects of multiple factors. In
such cases, students’ tendency to figure out heuristic factors as determining causal factors
should not be surprising. If we cannot clarify and present the emergence mechanism clearly
and comprehensibly, students create their explanations on the spot based on perceived
salient features, their background knowledge
Na-O-H a base CH3-0-H an alcohol CLO-H an acid acid H-O-H a neutral compound
This example clearly show that chemical properties of entities cannot be attributed to
presence of particular components reductively. Without adopting a systemist perspective, it is
very difficult if not impossible to make sense of this empirical facts. In contrast to an
emergentist perspective, a reductionist approach may work well with the learned examples
and seem to be consistent and compatible with the teachers’ explanations. However, learners
can be easily mislead by such reductionist inferences and construct various misconceptions.
For example, in explaining acidity if the emergence mechanism of acidic property is not
explicitly clarified and understood by students, they can misleadingly attribute acidity to H
atoms in the molecule and thought that as the number of H atoms in the molecule increase,
acidity increases.
Explanations of periodic trends in acid strength
Typical teaching practices and misconceptions regarding acid strength are also indicative of
the critical importance of emergentist perspective (Tiimay, 2016). Instruction on acids— bases
in introductory chemistry courses tends to center on algorithmic problem solving rather than
conceptual understanding of the scientific models or the interconnected consideration of
factors that affect acid strength (de Vos and Pilot, 2001; Furié-Mas et al., 2005). Explanations
of acid strength and related factors in textbooks’ are also ineffective and misleading in some
respects. In his examination of nine general chemistry textbooks, Moran (2006, p. 800)
identified that the following trends in acid strength are usually cited in the textbooks: - For
binary hydrides HsA across a period, acid strength is in order of increasing electronegativity of
A, for example: NH3 < H20 < HF. - For binary acids within a group, acid strength increases as
the electronegativity of A decreases. For example, in the hydrohalogenic acids the acid
strength order is HF < HCI < HBr < HI. - For oxoacids (HO),XO», with a given central atom
(X), the stronger acid has the greater number of “extra” O atoms (m in the formula). - Among
oxoacids with the same m and n and different central atoms (X), acid strength increases with
increasing electronegativity of X.
10 | Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Please do not adjust margi

---

Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
and intuitive heuristics. And, when this is the case, they usually think constituent entities as
property carriers (for example, attributing acidity to H atoms) or infer incorrect deterministic
causal linkages between an emergent property and its isolated parameters (for example,
thinking bond polarity as only determinative of acid strength) (Tiimay, 2016).
especially chemical science (Reiher, 2003; Villani, 2014). According to Villani, chemistry is the
first true systemic science and the main chemical concepts such as molecule and compound
are systemic concepts: “A molecule ‘is not an atomic aggregate’, but ‘is an atomic system’, a
structured piece of world, which leads the emergence of ‘new’ properties.” (Villani, 2014, p.
109). Viewing chemical entities as systems rather than simple aggregates will apparently
facilitate conceptualizing the emergent nature of chemical entities, properties and interactions.
In fact, promoting system thinking for facilitating comprehension of emergence has been
emphasized by many researchers in other disciplines as well (e.g., Wilensky and Resnick,
1999; Assaraf and Orion, 2005). Conceptualizing chemical entities as systems, recognizing
structural constraints and relational interactions of components, and correspondingly
emergence of the system’s properties is not easy for students. Especially, as is often the case
in chemistry, when the emergence is a result of multiple causal factors/parameters some of
which work against each other, dominant or arise only in particular conditions; understanding
emergence will be very difficult for students. However, the development of a
systemist-emergentist perspective for thinking about chemical entities, their properties,
relations and interactions can be supported through appropriate representations. A valid
explanation of an emergence mechanism (as opposed to reductionist explanations or
one-factor cause- effect relations) requires carefully designed representations which specify
how the integrated effects of structurally constrained relations, and interactions of the
constituent entities in the system produce the emergent property in question. Accordingly,
effective representations of emergent properties and emergence mechanism should basically
convey the following information; - chemical systems in question and their composition and
structure, properties, relations and interactions of constituents under the structural constraints
of their systems, - emergence of properties of the system as a result of the integrated effects
of structurally constrained relations and interactions of constituents. Since, and associated
representations represent all aspects of the considered system we use pluralistic models and
different representations in accordance with our purpose. These representations include
variety of molecular models and diagrams, structural formulas, Lewis structures, electron
density distribution graphics, particulate drawings, analogies, and dynamic computer models
(Shusterman and Shusterman, 1997; Gilbert and Boulter, 1998). Each representation has
different functionality with respect to representing entities, their properties, relations, and
interactions in the considered chemical system (such as a molecule, or a reaction system). In
this respect, the task of chemical educator is to select or develop, and use most suitable
representations by considering what to represent and how it can be represented. For

---

example, following particulate drawing is an_ effective representation that can be used to
illustrate the mechanism of thermal expansion of gases.
The octet rule
learners construct
Another example of how might misconceptions from typical teaching practices in lack of an
emergentist perspective comes from the chemical bonding topic. As has been pointed,
because of the issue of emergence, chemists tend to treat chemical principles and rules (such
as Aufbau principle, or octet rule) as chemical heuristics that are not always but usually valid
for similar systems (Taber, 2009; Tiimay, 2016). For example, chemists were well aware of
that the octet rule is not valid for all chemical systems and should be used with caution, even
in the times of the first formulation of this rule (see, Lewis, 1923). However, it is
well-established that, typical teaching models and associated accounts of chemical bonding
give an impression that “the octet rule” is an exact, determining rule rather than a chemical
heuristic that is valid for limited chemical systems (Taber, 2001, 2009; Taber and Coll, 2002).
Research on students understanding of chemical bonding have revealed that learners’
conceptualization of “the octet rule” as an exact rule rather than a chemical heuristic leads
many learning difficulties and misconceptions about chemical bonding and the stability of
chemical species (Taber, 2001, 2009; Taber and Coll, 2002).
Explicitly representing and emphasizing the emergence in chemistry
Based on learners’ difficulties in understanding emergence and the brief overview of typical
teaching practices, we can say that what is missing in our typical teaching is presenting
emergent characteristic of chemical entities, properties, and interactions in an accessible and
comprehensible manner and developing a systemist-emergentist perspective among
students. The findings of studies on students’ understanding of emergent properties in various
disciplines imply that, understanding emergent properties and developing an emergentist
perspective is often beyond the intuitive reach of learners unless explicitly taught (Wilensky
and Resnick, 1999; Rappoport and Ashkenazi, 2008; Talanquer, 2008; Chi ef al., 2012;
Tiimay, 2016). Obviously, we as chemical educators have an important role in making explicit
the emergent characteristic of chemical entities, properties, and interactions which has been
implicit in typical instruction. Therefore, in order for developing an emergentist perspective,
one clear suggestion is presenting and emphasizing emergent characteristic of chemical
entities, properties, and interactions explicitly in a comprehensible manner. As has been
pointed, understanding emergence in chemistry closely related to understanding chemical
entities as systems at various complexity levels, Although it is not explicit in typical teaching
resources and practices, system thinking is one of the fundamental characteristics of all
molecular science and
models. cannot

---

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 11
Please do not adjust margins

---

Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Figure 3 Illustration of negative thermal expansion of water as a result of structural properties
and interactions of water molecules.
In order to explicitly emphasize components of the system and emergence mechanisms in
chemical systems, we can also use generic representational tools such as concept maps to
indicate components of a system, and causal diagrams to facilitate the integrated
consideration of all emergence related causal factors/parameters. The framework, proposed
in this article, can significantly facilitate this process by serving both as an analytical tool for
defining the considered chemical phenomena in terms of systems, constituent entities, their
properties, relations, and interactions; and as a crafting tool for explaining emergence
mechanism based on analyzed structure and properties of the system. As an example, we
can consider the emergence of acidic property. Explanation of this emergent property
depends on the adopted acid-base theory. According to Arrhenius model, a substance is an
acid if it gives hydrogen ions (H*) as a result of its ionic dissociation in water. Based on this
model, acidic property of a substance emerges depending on the following parameters: 1. It
must have at least one hydrogen atom 2. The H-X bond must be broken. It can be broken
homolytically or heterolytically in three different ways: H-X > H-X > X* H-X > H*:X 3. The X
atom must be more electronegative than H atom to give Ht. As can be seen, all of these
factors are necessary but, of themselves, not sufficient for the emergence of acidic property.
Dependence of acidic property to the integrated effect of these parameters can be
represented with a causal diagram as follows:
Figure 2 Illustration of thermal expansion of gases.
This representation illustrates the components of the system, effect of heating on particles’
energy and the space between them. With these features, it effectively illustrates how the
expansion of a macroscopic gas sample emerges from changes in energy and distances
between the gas particles. In explaining thermal expansion we don’t need to consider atomic
or molecular structure of gas particles, and thinking each molecular entity as a particle is
sufficient. However, in some cases we need to consider molecular structure and constrained
interactions of entities in order to understand the emergence mechanism. We can consider
“negative thermal expansion” of water as an example. Many substances expand when heated
and contract when cooled. But water is one of the few exceptions to this behavior. Even
though water does expand when heated and contract when cooled at most temperatures, it
expands when cooled and contracts when heated between 4 and 0 degrees Celsius. This
unexpected behavior emerges from the particular molecular structure of water, its ability to
make multiple hydrogen bonds, and the hexagonal arrangement of the water molecules in ice
crystals at lower temperatures due to the network of hydrogen bonds. The following
representation can be used to illustrate the emergence of this property as a result of the
structural properties and interactions of water molecules.

---

Containing H atom:
H-X bond strength Acidic property
H-X bond polarity Figure 4 A causal diagram to illustrate the parameters of acidic property
based on Arrhenius model.
A complementary suggestion for supporting system thinking and comprehension of
emergence is using and emphasizing the terms “emergence” and “system” explicitly
whenever appropriate while teaching different classes of chemical entities, their properties,
relations and transformations (Tiimay, 2016). For example, we might use the term “atom
system” instead of “atom”; “a molecule system that has acidic property” instead of “acid
molecule”, “an acid-base reaction system” instead of “an acid-base reaction”, and “emergence
of acidic property” instead of “acidic property”. The “emergence” and the “system” terms are in
fact meta-level terms in chemical reasoning and they will presumably differentiate learners’
perceptions about chemical entities and processes by guiding students about how to think
chemically in this discipline.
Water Ice
12 | Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Please do not adjust margi

---

Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
Using argumentation as a scaffold for the development of emergentist perspective Explicitly
representing and emphasizing the emergence through appropriate teaching models is
necessary but might not be sufficient for the comprehension of the emergence. Because of
our cognitive constraints, we are unable to mentally represent and consider all aspects of a
system. Instead, our mental models typically include limited number of entities, properties,
relations and interactions that we perceived as important and explanatory (ohnson-Laird,
1983). And, our perceptions —_ and conceptualizations are considerably affected from our
prior knowledge. Sophisticated prior knowledge of scientists (such as the relevant scientific
theories and models, empirical facts, meta- level epistemological and ontological
understandings) enrich their repertoire of effective entities, properties and possible
interactions in particular contexts and thus enable them to more correctly explain and predict
the considered system and its emergent properties. Contrary to scientists, novice students do
not have sophisticated knowledge of the domain that facilitate drawing sound inferences from
their experiences; however, they have the basic cognitive skills needed to generate mental
models such as making analogies, idealizations and abstractions (Brewer and
Samarapungavan, 1991; Brewer et al., 1998; Greca and Moreira, 2000; Taber, 2002, 2008;
Nersessian, 2009). Therefore, it is important to scaffold learning process in such a way that
focus students’ attention on key aspects of scientific models and provide indications and
evidences for the emergent characteristic of chemical entities, their properties, and
interactions. In this respect, epistemologically sound argumentation practices can be a fruitful
pedagogy for supporting chemical understanding and the development of an emergentist
perspective (Erduran, 2007; Erduran and Jiménez-Aleixandre, 2008; Tiimay, 2016).
Argumentation on carefully selected paradigmatic examples that can highlight the emergent
nature of chemical entities, properties, and interactions can serve as a catalyst for
understanding the emergence and its consequences in chemistry. Engaging learners in
argumentation about emergent chemical properties can also provide us with opportunities to
increase their meta-level awareness of emergence in the epistemology and the ontology of
chemistry by immersing learners in chemical ways of thinking and doing (Izquierdo-Aymerich,
2013). In order to support an efficient and meaningful argumentative discourse, besides using
carefully selected paradigmatic cases, the relevant experimental data should be made readily
accessible to learners as well. Additionally, in order for modeling chemists’ mindset and ways
of reasoning, we should not argue only on explaining general trends in chemical properties
with isolated dominant factors, but also on comparative examples including conflicting cases
to make students consider why any single factor is not enough for explaining given cases. For
example, following argumentative discussions can be used to support learners’ understanding
of the emergent nature of acidic property and acid strength. -Given the parameters of acidic
property based on Arrhenius model, which of the following substances in water are

---

expected to show acidic property? Explain the reasons for your claims. KH, CHs, HBr - NH;
contains 3 H atoms and H atoms are bonded to highly electronegative N atom. Why NH3
does not show acidic property in water? Explain your reasoning regarding the parameters of
acidic property. - PHs contains 3 H atoms bonded to P, and the P-H bond strength is less than
that of H-Cl. Why PH; does not show acidic property? Explain your reasoning regarding the
parameters of acidic property. - Can acidic property be attributed to a particular element or
parameter?
- Predict the acid strength of the following compounds and explain your reasoning. CHa, NHs,
H2O, HF HF, HCl, HBr, HI -Observed relative acid strengths of these compounds are as
follows: HF > H20 > NHs > CHs HI > HBr > HCI > HF Did your prediction agree with the
findings? If not, reconsider and revise your answers by examining the following table. Can you
infer which parameters can affect acid strength, and in which way they affect it?
pKa AEN D(H-X) — D(H*X°) (kJ/mol) __ (kJ/mol) H-CHs 49 04 438 1744 H-NH? 34 0.9 450
1688 H-OH 14 14 498 1633 H-F 3.2 19 570 1554 H-Cl 3 0.9 432 1395 H-Br 6 07 366 1353 HI
7 04 298 1314
AEN: Pauling electronegativity difference D(H-X): Gas phase homolytic bond dissociation
energy D(H*X>): Gas phase heterolytic H-X bond dissociation energy
Through such argumentative discourses we can get students to recognize that no one factor
alone can determine emergent chemical properties and they emerge from the integrated
effects of multiple factors. They can also recognize that rules and principles in chemistry are
unavoidably used heuristically by chemists. These experiences, then, can be used as a
pedagogical resource for clarifying the role of emergence in chemistry and meaningfully
modeling authentic chemical thinking by indicating how chemists think about entities, their
properties, relations, and interactions at different levels from an emergentist perspective.
Argumentation practices can support these learning gains by providing a quality control
mechanism for learners’ mental models as well as enriching their repertoire of alternative
conceptualizations of the underlying entities, their properties, relations, and interactions. The
availability and consideration of alternative well developed conceptualizations will support
conceptual change significantly (Thagard, 1992; Taber, 2001,
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 13
Please do not adjust margi

---

ry Education R
Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
2008). Throughout argumentation process, learners will effectively make their mental models
of the system structure and behavior explicit; will have opportunities to critically evaluate their
own and others’ conceptualizations and thus aware of limitations and strengths of each one in
terms of empirical and conceptual consistency; and will be encouraged to revise their
understanding regarding the epistemology and the ontology of chemistry, and give us clues
for chemically meaningful education. Since the emergentist perspective represents a more
authentic disciplinary lens for understanding chemistry and chemical knowledge (Luisi, 2002;
Newman, 2013), it provides an epistemologically and ontologically sound framework for
identifying the sources of learning difficulties and developing chemically meaningful and
effective instructional approaches for addressing them. As has been clarified in this article, in
lack of an emergentist perspective learners unavoidably construct flawed mental models and
particular types of misconceptions (such as attributing an emergent property to particular
components of the system, or thinking an emergent property as additive property). In order to
support the development of the emergentist perspective among chemistry learners, it was
proposed to explicitly present the emergent nature of chemical entities, their properties, and
interactions in an accessible and comprehensible manner by clarifying all emergence related
factors and their causal relations in a holistic and systemic manner through appropriate
representations and pedagogical approaches. Considering chemistry from an emergentist
perspective can make significant and chemically meaningful contributions to chemistry
education. As briefly exemplified and discussed in this article, the emergentist perspective has
a great potential to make sense of many learning difficulties and misconceptions that derive
from this discipline-specific characteristic of chemistry as well as to develop chemically
meaningful and authentic teaching interventions to overcome these difficulties. At his point it
should be noted that, by no means am I suggesting that learners” failure to understand the
emergent nature of chemical entities, properties, and interactions is the only source of
misconceptions in chemistry. However, apparently many misconceptions derive from this
failure and therefore the emergentist perspective will guide us in developing and implementing
epistemologically sound teaching models and instructional approaches in this respect. As an
epistemologically and ontologically sound disciplinary perspective for understanding
discipline-specific learning difficulties, sources of misconceptions, and likely to be effective
teaching interventions; the emergentist perspective offers a productive avenue for further
research in chemical education. Possible areas for further research from this perspective
include the following: - Clarifying the emergence mechanism and accordingly identifying the
learning demands and possible difficulty areas for the key chemical properties and
phenomena. - Interpretively analyzing learners’ misconceptions regarding the emergent
chemical properties and phenomena in terms of the clarified emergence mechanism, and

---

learning demands. - Examining the appropriateness and adequacy of existent teaching
models and practices from an emergentist perspective. - Developing, implementing, and
assessing the effects of new teaching models and practices that are informed by the
emergentist perspective.
mental models from an emergentist perspective.
Using historical cases to support the adoption of emergentist perspective Since, the
conceptualized entities, their properties and relations/interactions in the scientific models have
always evolved and shaped in response to the specific contextual parameters such as the
research problems, available facilities, empirical data at hand, knowledge background and
accepted paradigms at the time; presenting these contextual parameters along with the
scientific model in question may help learners in understanding the model and the
conceptualization of emergence mechanism. In this respect, using history of science in such a
way that learners can recognize why and how the scientists focused on specific entities,
properties, relations; how they conceptualized them; and consequently how the
conceptualized model enable them to describe, explain, predict and control the chemical
systems can be very beneficial to students. Such an approach may help us to clarify the
evolution of chemists’ conceptualizations from a reductionist to an emergentist perspective,
and thereby facilitate learners’ adoption of an emergentist perspective. In all fields of
chemistry we can exemplify struggling processes of making sense of empirical observations
regarding emergent properties and gradual but evolutionary progression in our
conceptualizations from a reductionist perspective to an emergentist perspective. For
example, we can consider historical development of conceptualizations on acid-base
concepts (Jensen, 1980). Initially, chemists tried to explain acidity from a reductionist
perspective by attributing acidic property to constituent parts. For instance, Lavoisier
attributed acidic property to oxygen element, while Liebig associated it to hydrogen. However,
empirical results revealed that these explanations could not capture all cases of acidity, and
there is no simple causal linkage between constituent parts and the properties of the whole.
Gradually, with the new empirical findings and developments in our theoretical
conceptualizations on properties, possible relations and interactions of entities, both in
isolation and in organized chemical structures; more sophisticated acid-base models (such as
Bronsted-Lowry’s and Lewis’ models) were developed and our conceptualizations of acidic
property have evolved towards seeing acidic property as an emergent property.
In conclusion
In this article, I tried to clarify the critical role of emergence in the epistemology and the
ontology of chemistry; its consequences for chemical reasoning and explanations; and its
implications for chemical education. As outlined in this article, the emergentist perspective
represents a meta-level
14 | Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15

---

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Please do not adjust margins

---

Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Perspective
- Clarifying the historical development of emergentist perspective for the key chemical
properties and phenomena. Assessing the effects of presenting these historical developments
on developing the emergentist understanding of chemistry.
Erduran S. and Jiménez-Aleixandre M.P., (2008), Argumentation in science education,
Dordrecht: Springer. Furié-Mas C., Calatayud M.L., Guisasola J. and Furié-Gémez C., (2005),
How are the concepts and theories of acid—base reactions presented? Chemistry in
textbooks and as presented by teachers, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 27, 1337-1358. Furié C. and
Calatayud, M.L., (1996), Difficulties with the geometry and polarity of molecules: Beyond
misconceptions, J. Chem. Educ., 73, 36-41. Gabel D.L., (1998), The complexity of chemistry
and implications for teaching, In B.J. Fraser and K.G. Tobin (Eds.), International handbook of
science education, (pp. 233-248), Great Britain: Kluwer. Gabel D.L., (1993), Use of the
particle nature of matter in developing conceptual understanding, J. Chem. Educ., 70,
193-194. Garnett P.J., Garnett P.J. and Hackling M., (1995), Students” alternative
conceptions in chemistry: A review of research and implications for teaching and learning,
Studies in Science Education, 25, 69-95. Gentner D. and Stevens A.L. (Eds.), (1983), Mental
models, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Giere R.N., (1988), Explaining science: A cognitive
approach, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Giere R.N., (1991), Understanding scientific
reasoning, Forth Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart & Winston Gilbert J.K. and Boulter C.J., (1998),
Learning science through models and modeling, In B.J. Fraser and K.G. Tobin (Eds.),
International handbook of science education, (pp. 53-66), Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic
Publishers. Gilbert J.K. and Treagust D.F., (2009), Multiple representations in chemical
education, Dordrecht: Springer. Gilbert J.K. and Watts D.M., (1983), Concepts,
misconceptions and alternative conceptions: Changing perspectives in science education.
Studies in Science Education, 10, 61-98. Greca I.M. and Moreira M.A., (2000), Mental
models, conceptual models, and modelling, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 22, 1-11. Greca ILM. and
Moreira M.A., (2002), Mental, physical, and mathematical models in the teaching and learning
of physics, Sci. Educ., 86, 106-121. Griffiths A.K. and Preston K.R., (1992), Grade-12
students’ misconceptions relating to fundamental characteristics of atoms and molecules, J.
Res. Sci. Teach., 29, 611-628. Halloun LA., (2004), Modeling theory in science education,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Ingham A.M. and Gilbert J.K., (1991), The use of
analogue models by students of chemistry at higher education level, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 13,
193-202. Izquierdo-Aymerich M., (2013), School chemistry: An historical and philosophical
approach, Science & Education, 22, 1633- 1653. Jensen W.B., (1980), The Lewis acid-base
concepts: An overview, New York: John Wiley & Sons. Jensen W.B., (1998), Logic, history,
and the chemistry textbook: I. Does chemistry have a logical structure?, J. Chem. Educ., 75,
679-687.
References

---

Andersson B., (1990), Pupils’ conceptions of matter and its transformations (age 12-16),
Studies in Science Education, 18, 53-85. Ashkenazi, G. and Weaver, G.C., (2007), Using
lecture demonstrations to promote the refinement of concepts: The case of teaching solvent
miscibility, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 8, 186-196. Assaraf O.B.-Z. and Orion N., (2005),
Development of system thinking skills in the context of earth system education, J. Res. Sci.
Teach., 42, 518-560. Ben-Zvi R., Eylon B.-S. and Silberstein J., (1986), Is an atom of copper
malleable?, J. Chem. Educ., 63, 64-66. Brewer W.F., Chinn C.A. and Samarapungavan A.,
(1998), Explanation in scientists and children, Minds and Machines, 8, 119-136. Brewer W.F.
and Samarapungavan A., (1991), Children’s theories vs. scientific theories: Differences in
reasoning or differences in knowledge, In R.R. Hoffman and D.S. Palermo (Eds.), Cognition
and the symbolic processes: Applied and ecological perspectives, (pp. 209-232), Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum. Caldin E.F., (1959), Theories and the development of chemistry, The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 10, 209-222. Carey S., (1985), Conceptual change in
childhood, Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, MIT Press. Chi M.T., Roscoe R.D., Slotta J.D.,
Roy M. and Chase C.C., (2012), Misconceived causal explanations for emergent processes,
Cognitive Science, 36, 1-61. Coll R.K. and Treagust D.F., (2003), Investigation of secondary
school, undergraduate, and graduate learners’ mental models of ionic bonding, J. Res. Sci.
Teach., 40, 464-486. De Vos W. and Pilot A., (2001), Acids and bases in layers: The stratal
structure of an ancient topic, J. Chem. Educ., 78, 494- 499, Demircioglu G., Ayas A. and
Demircioglu H., (2005), Conceptual change achieved through a new teaching program on
acids and bases, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 6, 36-51. Enawaty E. and Sartika R.P., (2015),
Description of students” misconception in chemical bonding, International Conference on
Research, Implementation and
In Proceeding of
Education of Mathematics and Sciences 2015, Yogyakarta State University, 17-19 May 2015.
Erduran S., (2007), Breaking the law: Promoting domain- specificity in chemical education in
the context of arguing about the periodic law, Found. Chem., 9, 247-263. Erduran S. and
Scerri E., (2002), The nature of chemical knowledge and chemical education, In J.K. Gilbert,
O. de Jong, R. Justi, D.F. Treagust and J.H. van Driel (Eds.), Chemical education: Towards
research-based practice, (pp. 7-27), Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15 | 15
Please do not adjust margi

---

Perspective
Chemistry Education Research and Practice
Johnson-Laird P.N., (1983), Mental models, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnstone A.H., (1991), Why is science difficult to learn? Things are seldom what they seem,
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 7, 75-83. Johnstone A.H., (2000), Teaching of
chemistry-logical or psychological?, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 1, 9-15. Kozma R.B. and
Russell J., (1997), Multimedia and understanding: Expert and novice responses to different
representations of chemical phenomena, J. Res. Sci. Teach., 43, 949-968. Kozma, R.B.,
Russell J.W., Jones T., Wykoff J., Marx N. and Davis J., (1997), Use of _
simultaneous-synchronized macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic representations to
enhance the teaching and learning of chemical concepts, J. Chem, Educ.,74, 330-334. Laszlo
P., (2013), Towards teaching chemistry as a language, Science & Education, 22, 1669-1706.
Levy Nahum T., Hofstein A., Mamlok-Naaman R. and Bar-Dov Z., (2004), Can final
examinations amplify students’ misconceptions in chemistry?, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 5,
301-325, Lewis G.N., (1923), Valence and the structure of atoms and molecules, New York:
Chemical Catalog Company. Lin H-S., Cheng H-J. and Lawrenz F., (2000), The assessment
of students and teachers’ understanding of gas laws, J. Chem. Educ., 77, 235-238. Lombardi
O. and Labarca M., (2005), The ontological autonomy of the chemical world, Found. Chem.,7,
125-148. Luisi P.L., (2002), Emergence in chemistry: Chemistry as the embodiment of
emergence, Found. of Chem., 4, 183-200. Luxford C.J. and Bretz $.L., (2013), Moving beyond
definitions: What student-generated models reveal about their understanding of covalent
bonding and ionic bonding, Chem. Educ. Res, Pract., 14, 214-222. McIntyre L., (2007),
Emergence and reduction in chemistry: Ontological or epistemological concepts?, Synthese,
155, 337- 343, Moran M.J., (2006), Factors that influence relative acid strength in water: A
simple model, J. Chem. Educ., 83, 800-803. Nakhleh M.B., (1992), Why some students don’t
learn chemistry. J. Chem, Educ., 69, 191-196. Nakiboglu C., (2003), Instructional
misconceptions of Turkish prospective chemistry teachers about atomic orbitals and
hybridization, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 4, 171-188. Nersessian N.J., (1999), Model-based
reasoning in conceptual change, In L. Magnani, N.J. Nersessian and P. Thagard (Eds.),
Model-based reasoning in scientific discovery, (pp. 5-22), New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Press. Nersessian N.J., (2002), The cognitive basis of model-based
reasoning in science, In P. Carruthers, S. Stich and M. Siegal (Eds.), The cognitive basis of
science, (pp. 133-153), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Nersessian N.J., (2009),
Conceptual change: Creativity, cognition, and culture, InJ. Meheus and T. Nicles (Eds.),
Models of discovery and creativity, (pp. 127-166), Netherlands: Springer.
Newman M.., (2013), Emergence, supervenience, and introductory chemical education,
Science & Education, 22, 1655-1667. Rappoport L.T. and Ashkenazi G., (2008), Connecting
levels of representation: Emergent versus submergent perspective, /nt. J. Sci. Educ., 30,
1585-1603. Reiher M., (2003), A systems theory for chemistry, Found. Chem., 5, 23-41.
Salame, LL, Sarowar, S., Begum, $. and Krauss, D., (2011), Students’ alternative conceptions

---

about atomic properties and the periodic table, Chem. Educator, 16, 190-194. Sanger M.J.
and Greenbowe T-J., (1999), An analysis of college chemistry textbooks as sources of
misconceptions and errors in electrochemistry, J. Chem. Educ., 76, 853-860. Scerri E.R.,
(2001), The new philosophy of chemistry and its relevance to chemical education, Chem.
Educ. Res. Pract., 2, 165-170. Scerri E.R., (2004), How ab initio is ab initio quantum
chemistry, Found. Chem., 6, 93-116. Scerri E.R., (2007), The periodic table: Its story and its
significance, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Schmidt H.J., (1991), A label as a hidden
persuader: Chemists’ neutralization concept, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 13, 459-471. Schmidt H.J.,
Baumgartner T. and Eybe H., (2003), Changing ideas about the periodic table of elements
and students’ alternative concepts of isotopes and allotropes, J. Res. Sci. Teach., 40,
257-277. Shulman L.S., (1987), Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform,
Harvard Educational Review, 57, 1-23. Shusterman G.P. and Shusterman A.J., (1997),
Teaching chemistry with electron density models, J. Chem. Educ., 74, 771-76. Sozbilir M.,
(2002), Turkish chemistry undergraduate students” misunderstandings of Gibbs free energy,
Univ. Chem. Educ., 6, 73-83. Taber K.S., (2000), Multiple frameworks?: Evidence of manifold
conceptions in individual cognitive structure, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 22, 399-417. Taber K.S.,
(2001), Building the structural concepts of chemistry: Some considerations from educational
research, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2, 123-158. Taber K.S., (2002), diagnosis and cure: Vol. I:
Theoretical background, London: Royal Society of Chemistry. Taber K.S., (2008), Conceptual
resources for learning science: Issues of transience and grain-size in cognition and cognitive
structure, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 30, 1027-1053. Taber K.S., (2009), College students’ conceptions
of chemical stability: The widespread adoption of a heuristic rule out of context and beyond its
range of application, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 31, 1333-1358. Taber K.S., (2013), Revisiting the
chemistry triplet: drawing upon the nature of chemical knowledge and the psychology of
learning to inform chemistry education, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 14, 156-168. Taber K.S. and
Coll R., (2002), Bonding, In J.K. Gilbert, O.D. Jong, R. Justi, D.F. Treagust and J.H. Van Driel
(Eds.),
Chemical misconceptions—Prevention,
16 | Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00, 1-15
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Please do not adjust margi

---

ry Educatio
Chemistry Education Research and Practice Perspective 1 y 2 3 Chemical education:
Towards research-based practice, (pp. 4 213-234), Dordrecht: Kluwer. 5 Talanquer V.,
(2006), Commonsense chemistry: A model for 6 understanding students’ alternative
conceptions, J. Chem. 7 Educ., 83, 811-816. 8 Talanquer V., (2008), Students’ predictions
about the sensory 9 properties of chemical compounds: Additive versus emergent 10
frameworks. Sci. Educ., 92, 96-114. 1 Talanquer V., (2011), Macro, submicro, and symbolic:
The many 12 faces of the chemistry “triplet”, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 33, 179-195. 13 Talanquer V.,
(2013), How do students reason about chemical 14 substances and reactions?, In G.
Tsaparlis and H. Sevian i (Eds.), Concepts of matter in science education, (pp. 331-345),
Dordrecht: Springer. 17 ‘Tan, G.C.D., Taber, K.S., Goh, N.K. and Chia, L.S., (2005), The 18
ionisation energy diagnostic instrument: A two-tier multiple- 2 choice instrument to determine
high school students’ 21 understanding of ionisation energy, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 6,
180-197. 33 Tasker R. and Dalton R., (2006), Research into practice: Visualisation of the
molecular world using animations, Chem. 25 Educ. Res. Pract.,7, 141-159. 96 Teo T.W., Goh
M.T. and Yeo L.W., (2014), Chemistry education 27 research trends: 2004-2013, Chem.
Educ. Res. Pract., 18, 470- 487. 28 29 (1992), Conceptual revolutions, New Jersey: 30
Princeton University Press. 31 Tiimay H., (2014), Prospective chemistry teachers’ mental
models of vapor pressure, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 15, 366-379. 32 por pi 33. ‘Tiimay H.,
(2016), Emergence, learning difficulties, and misconceptions in chemistry undergraduate _
students’ 34 35 conceptualizations of acid strength, Science & Education, 36 DOL:
10.1007/s11191-015-9799-x. 37 Valanides N., (2000), Primary student teachers’
understanding of 38 the particulate nature of matter and its transformations during 39
dissolving, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 1, 249-262. 40 Villani G., (2014), Structured system in
chemistry: Comparison 4 with mechanics and biology, Found. Chem., 16, 107-123. 42
Wandersee J.H., Mintzes J.J. and Novak J.D., (1994), Research on 43 alternative
conceptions in science, In D. L. Gabel (Ed.), 44 Handbook of research on science teaching
and learning (pp. 45 177-210), Macmillan Publishing Company, NY. 46 C.Y. and Barrow L.H.,
(2013), Exploring conceptual 47 frameworks of models of atomic structures and periodic 48
variations, chemical bonding, and molecular shape and 49 polarity: A comparison of
undergraduate general chemistry 50 students with high and low levels of content knowledge,
Chem. 51 Educ. Res. Pract., 14, 130-146.
52 Wilensky U. and Resnick M., (1999), Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to
making sense of the world, J. 54 Sci. Educ. Technol., 8, 3-19. Zumdah! $.S. and Zumdahl
$.A., (2012), Chemistry: An atoms first approach (2nd ed.), Cengage Learning.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Chem. Educ. Res. Pract., 2016, 00,
1-15 | 17
Please do not ad; margi